Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the antiarrhythmic drugs and beta-blockers.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the antiarrhythmic drugs and beta-blockers.
Begin with the classification.
The antiarrhythmic drugs are most commonly classified by the Vaughan Williams
system, according to their principal action on the cardiac action potential.
Class one are the sodium-channel blockers, subdivided into one-a,
which also prolong repolarisation, such as quinidine and procainamide; one-b,
which shorten it, such as lidocaine; and one-c, which markedly slow conduction,
such as flecainide.
Class two are the beta-adrenoceptor blockers.
Class three are the potassium-channel blockers that prolong repolarisation,
such as amiodarone and sotalol. Class four are the calcium-channel blockers acting
on the heart, verapamil and diltiazem.
Several important agents fall outside this scheme — adenosine,
digoxin and magnesium. The classification is useful but imperfect,
since several drugs, notably amiodarone, have actions in more than one class.
So the Vaughan Williams system organises the drugs by their dominant
electrophysiological action.
Relate the classes to the cardiac action potential.
The cardiac action potential has phases that the classes target.
Phase zero, the rapid upstroke, is the sodium influx,
blocked by the class one agents, slowing conduction.
Phases one to two are the plateau, with calcium influx,
on which the class four calcium-channel blockers act,
particularly at the nodal tissues whose upstroke is calcium-dependent.
Phase three, repolarisation, is the potassium efflux,
prolonged by the class three potassium-channel blockers,
lengthening the action potential and refractory period.
The beta-blockers of class two act by reducing sympathetic drive,
slowing the pacemaker phase-four depolarisation and atrioventricular conduction.
So each class modifies a specific phase or influence on the action potential,
which determines its electrophysiological and antiarrhythmic effect,
and the antiarrhythmic action is to suppress abnormal automaticity or to interrupt
re-entry by altering conduction and refractoriness.
Describe the class one agents, using lidocaine and flecainide as examples.
The class one agents block the fast sodium channel,
reducing the rate of rise of phase zero and slowing conduction,
with use-dependence — binding more to channels that are open or inactivated,
so they act preferentially on rapidly firing or ischaemic tissue.
Lidocaine, a class one-b agent, shortens the action potential and has little effect
on normal tissue but suppresses ventricular arrhythmias,
particularly in the context of ischaemia, and is given intravenously.
Flecainide, a class one-c agent, markedly slows conduction and is effective for
atrial and supraventricular arrhythmias and for chemical cardioversion of atrial
fibrillation in the structurally normal heart,
but it is proarrhythmic and contraindicated after myocardial infarction and in
structural heart disease, following the finding of increased mortality with class
one-c agents in that setting.
So the class one agents block sodium channels with use-dependence,
lidocaine for ventricular arrhythmias and flecainide for atrial arrhythmias in the
normal heart.
Describe amiodarone.
Amiodarone is the principal class three agent,
though it has actions across all four Vaughan Williams classes — blocking
potassium, sodium and calcium channels and beta receptors — prolonging the action
potential and refractory period and slowing conduction.
It is highly effective and broad-spectrum,
used for a wide range of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias,
including in cardiac arrest with shockable rhythms,
and it has relatively little negative inotropic effect,
which is an advantage in the failing heart.
Its great drawback is a formidable adverse-effect profile with chronic use,
owing to its iodine content and very long half-life of weeks: thyroid dysfunction,
both hypo- and hyperthyroidism; pulmonary fibrosis; hepatotoxicity;
corneal microdeposits; skin photosensitivity and slate-grey discoloration;
and numerous drug interactions.
So amiodarone is the broad-spectrum,
multi-class antiarrhythmic of choice in many emergencies,
limited in chronic use by its serious multi-organ toxicity.
Describe the class four agents and adenosine.
The class four agents, verapamil and diltiazem,
are the non-dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers that act on the heart,
slowing conduction through the atrioventricular node and reducing contractility,
used to control the ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation and to terminate
supraventricular tachycardias; they are negatively inotropic and are avoided in
significant heart failure and with beta-blockers because of the risk of severe
bradycardia and block.
Adenosine, outside the classification,
is an endogenous nucleoside that briefly blocks atrioventricular conduction;
given as a rapid intravenous bolus it terminates supraventricular tachycardias that
involve the node, with a very short duration of seconds,
producing transient asystole, chest discomfort and flushing.
So the class four agents slow the node for rate control and to terminate
supraventricular tachycardia, and adenosine transiently blocks the node to
terminate nodal re-entrant tachycardias.
Now the beta-blockers. How are they classified?
The beta-blockers, the class two antiarrhythmics,
are competitive antagonists at beta-adrenoceptors,
and they are classified by their selectivity and additional properties.
By receptor selectivity they are either cardioselective,
acting predominantly on beta-one receptors — such as metoprolol, atenolol,
bisoprolol and esmolol — or non-selective,
blocking beta-one and beta-two — such as propranolol.
Some have intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, a partial agonist effect.
Some have additional alpha-blocking, vasodilating action — labetalol and carvedilol.
They differ in pharmacokinetics: esmolol is ultra-short-acting,
metabolised by red-cell esterases, given by infusion for acute control;
others are longer-acting and given orally.
So the beta-blockers are classified by beta-one selectivity,
by intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, and by additional alpha-blockade,
and by their duration, which together guide the choice for a given purpose.
What are the effects and indications of the beta-blockers?
By blocking beta-one receptors the beta-blockers reduce heart rate,
contractility and conduction velocity and renin release,
which produces their therapeutic effects: as antiarrhythmics,
slowing the rate and the node; as antihypertensives, lowering pressure;
as anti-anginal agents, reducing myocardial oxygen demand;
and as agents that improve survival in chronic heart failure and after myocardial
infarction.
They are also used in thyrotoxicosis, in phaeochromocytoma after alpha-blockade,
for the somatic symptoms of anxiety, and in migraine prophylaxis.
Esmolol is used for acute intraoperative control of heart rate and pressure,
such as blunting the response to laryngoscopy.
So the beta-blockers, through beta-one blockade, are antiarrhythmic,
antihypertensive, anti-anginal and prognostically beneficial in heart failure and
after infarction, with a range of other uses,
and the cardioselective and short-acting agents are favoured in the perioperative
setting.
What are the adverse effects and cautions of beta-blockers?
The adverse effects follow from beta blockade.
Beta-one blockade causes bradycardia,
atrioventricular block and reduced contractility,
which can precipitate or worsen acute heart failure and cause hypotension.
Beta-two blockade, with the non-selective agents, causes bronchoconstriction,
dangerous in asthma, and peripheral vasoconstriction with cold extremities,
and it can mask the adrenergic warning signs of hypoglycaemia and impair recovery
from it, a concern in insulin-treated diabetes.
They cause fatigue and, sometimes, sleep disturbance.
Abrupt withdrawal after chronic use causes rebound tachycardia,
hypertension and ischaemia, so they are not stopped suddenly.
They are cautioned or avoided in significant bradycardia and heart block,
decompensated heart failure, asthma, and in combination with verapamil or diltiazem.
So the adverse effects are bradycardia and block, heart-failure precipitation,
bronchospasm, masking of hypoglycaemia, and a withdrawal syndrome.
What does the evidence say about starting beta-blockers perioperatively?
This was clarified by the large perioperative trial of metoprolol,
which examined starting a beta-blocker acutely before non-cardiac surgery in
patients at cardiovascular risk.
It found that, while perioperative beta-blockade reduced the incidence of
myocardial infarction, it increased overall mortality and the incidence of stroke,
attributed to hypotension and bradycardia,
particularly when a fixed dose was started shortly before surgery without titration.
The lesson is that beta-blockers should not be started acutely and untitrated in
the immediate perioperative period;
patients already established on a beta-blocker should continue it through surgery,
since abrupt withdrawal is harmful, but new beta-blockade, if indicated,
should be started well in advance and carefully titrated.
So the evidence cautions against acute perioperative initiation,
while supporting the continuation of established beta-blockade.
Tell me more about amiodarone's practical use and toxicity monitoring.
Amiodarone is given by a loading regimen,
because its very large volume of distribution and long half-life of weeks mean a
steady state is reached slowly; in emergencies it is given intravenously,
ideally through a central vein as it is irritant.
Because of its multi-organ toxicity,
chronic therapy requires baseline and periodic monitoring: thyroid function,
because it causes both hypo- and hyperthyroidism through its iodine load and direct
effects; liver function; and chest assessment for the pulmonary fibrosis that is
its most feared complication.
Patients are advised about photosensitivity,
and corneal deposits and the slate-grey skin discoloration are recognised.
It has important interactions, raising the levels of warfarin and digoxin,
which must be dose-adjusted.
So amiodarone is loaded because of its kinetics and monitored for thyroid,
hepatic and pulmonary toxicity, with attention to its interactions,
the price of its efficacy.
How would you approach the drug management of common arrhythmias?
I would tailor treatment to the rhythm and the haemodynamic state,
cardioverting the unstable patient electrically.
For a supraventricular tachycardia involving the atrioventricular node,
vagal manoeuvres then adenosine terminate it.
For atrial fibrillation, the choice is rate control — with a beta-blocker,
a rate-limiting calcium-channel blocker or digoxin — or rhythm control with
flecainide in the normal heart or amiodarone, alongside anticoagulation.
For ventricular tachycardia, amiodarone or lidocaine,
with cardioversion if unstable. For torsades de pointes,
magnesium is given and the precipitant, often a prolonged QT, addressed.
In cardiac arrest with a shockable rhythm, amiodarone is given after defibrillation.
Beta-blockers underpin the treatment of arrhythmias driven by sympathetic activity
and ischaemia.
So the approach is rhythm-specific,
with adenosine for nodal supraventricular tachycardia,
rate or rhythm control for atrial fibrillation,
amiodarone for ventricular arrhythmias, and magnesium for torsades.
Tell me about sotalol and the proarrhythmic risk of class three agents.
Sotalol is a non-selective beta-blocker that also has class three,
potassium-channel-blocking activity,
so it combines beta-blockade with prolongation of the action potential and
refractory period, used for atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.
Its class three action prolongs the QT interval,
which carries a risk of the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia torsades de
pointes, particularly with hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia,
bradycardia and other QT-prolonging drugs,
so it requires monitoring of the QT and electrolytes.
This proarrhythmic potential is a general feature of the class three agents that
prolong repolarisation, amiodarone being relatively less likely to cause torsades
than sotalol despite prolonging the QT.
So sotalol combines beta-blockade and class three action,
with QT prolongation and the risk of torsades as its principal hazard,
illustrating the proarrhythmic potential inherent in prolonging repolarisation.
What is the significance of the proarrhythmic potential of antiarrhythmic drugs
generally?
It is a central paradox of the class that drugs given to suppress arrhythmias can
themselves provoke them.
The class one-c agents increase mortality after myocardial infarction by provoking
lethal ventricular arrhythmias in the diseased heart,
as shown in the cardiac arrhythmia suppression trial,
which is why they are confined to the structurally normal heart.
The class three agents that prolong the QT can cause torsades de pointes.
The mechanisms involve the very effects — slowed conduction and prolonged
repolarisation — that are therapeutic in one context but arrhythmogenic in another,
especially in the diseased or electrolyte-disturbed heart.
The implications are to use these drugs for clear indications,
to avoid the class one-c agents in structural heart disease,
to monitor the QT and correct electrolytes with the class three agents,
and to recognise that suppressing an arrhythmia is not always beneficial.
So proarrhythmia disciplines the use of all antiarrhythmics.
Describe esmolol and its perioperative usefulness.
Esmolol is an ultra-short-acting, cardioselective beta-one blocker,
distinctive for being metabolised rapidly by red-cell esterases,
independently of hepatic and renal function,
giving it an onset and offset of minutes.
This makes it ideal for the acute, titratable control of heart rate and blood
pressure in the perioperative period:
blunting the tachycardic and hypertensive response to laryngoscopy and intubation
and to surgical stimulation, controlling the rate in acute atrial fibrillation,
and managing the haemodynamic surges of phaeochromocytoma surgery or thyroid storm.
Because its effect dissipates within minutes of stopping the infusion,
it is easily controlled and its effect can be quickly withdrawn if bradycardia or
hypotension occur.
So esmolol is the rapidly titratable,
ultra-short-acting beta-blocker for acute intraoperative heart-rate and pressure
control, valued precisely for its rapid onset and offset.
Pull it together: how do you use these drugs rationally?
I would treat arrhythmias according to the rhythm and the haemodynamic state,
cardioverting the unstable, and otherwise choosing the drug by its
electrophysiological action: adenosine for nodal supraventricular tachycardia;
a beta-blocker, a rate-limiting calcium-channel blocker or digoxin for rate control
in atrial fibrillation; flecainide in the normal heart and amiodarone more broadly
for rhythm control and for ventricular arrhythmias; magnesium for torsades.
I would respect the proarrhythmic potential,
avoiding class one-c agents in structural heart disease and monitoring the QT and
electrolytes with class three agents.
I would use beta-blockers for their antiarrhythmic, anti-anginal,
antihypertensive and prognostic benefits,
choosing cardioselective agents in those at risk of bronchospasm and esmolol for
acute control, continuing established beta-blockade through surgery but not
starting it acutely and untitrated.
And with amiodarone I would monitor for its multi-organ toxicity.
So rational use is rhythm-directed,
mechanism-based and mindful of proarrhythmia and toxicity.
Take me through the cardiac action potential phase by phase.
The fast-response action potential of atrial and ventricular myocytes has five
phases. Phase zero is the rapid upstroke,
a fast sodium influx depolarising the cell.
Phase one is a brief partial repolarisation as sodium channels close and a
transient potassium current flows.
Phase two is the plateau, a balance between calcium influx through L-type channels
and potassium efflux, maintaining depolarisation and underlying the long refractory
period. Phase three is repolarisation,
dominated by potassium efflux as calcium channels close.
Phase four is the resting potential, maintained by the potassium gradient,
and in pacemaker cells a slow depolarisation driven by the funny current and
calcium, bringing the cell to threshold.
The nodal cells have a slow-response action potential whose upstroke is
calcium-dependent. So the phases — sodium upstroke, plateau,
potassium repolarisation, pacemaker depolarisation — are the targets of the
antiarrhythmic classes.
Describe the class one-a agents.
The class one-a agents — quinidine,
procainamide and disopyramide — block the fast sodium channel with intermediate
kinetics, slowing phase zero and conduction,
and they also block potassium channels,
prolonging repolarisation and the action potential,
so they lengthen the QT interval.
They were used for both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias but are now little used
because of their adverse effects and proarrhythmic potential.
Quinidine causes cinchonism and gastrointestinal effects and prolongs the QT with a
risk of torsades.
Procainamide can cause a lupus-like syndrome with chronic use and is still used
intravenously for some arrhythmias, including in pre-excited atrial fibrillation.
Disopyramide is markedly negatively inotropic and antimuscarinic.
So the class one-a agents block sodium and potassium channels, prolonging the QT,
and have largely been superseded because of toxicity and proarrhythmia,
with procainamide retaining a niche role.
Describe mexiletine and propafenone.
Mexiletine is a class one-b agent, related to lidocaine but orally active,
blocking the sodium channel and shortening the action potential,
with little effect on normal tissue;
it is used for ventricular arrhythmias and has a role in some inherited arrhythmia
and myotonic syndromes.
Propafenone is a class one-c agent that, like flecainide,
markedly slows conduction and is used for atrial and supraventricular arrhythmias
and for the pharmacological cardioversion of atrial fibrillation in the
structurally normal heart, including as a patient-controlled pill-in-the-pocket;
it has some additional beta-blocking activity.
Like flecainide, propafenone is proarrhythmic and contraindicated in structural
heart disease and after myocardial infarction.
So mexiletine is an oral lidocaine-like agent for ventricular arrhythmias,
and propafenone a class one-c agent for atrial arrhythmias in the normal heart,
sharing flecainide's contraindication in structural disease.
Explain use-dependence and its significance.
Use-dependence, or frequency-dependence,
describes the property of the sodium-channel-blocking class one agents whereby they
bind more avidly to channels that are open or inactivated than to channels at rest,
so their blocking effect increases at higher heart rates,
when channels cycle more frequently, and in depolarised or ischaemic tissue,
where more channels are inactivated.
The significance is that these drugs act preferentially on rapidly firing or
diseased tissue — suppressing tachyarrhythmias and acting in ischaemic myocardium —
while having relatively little effect on normal tissue at normal rates,
which is therapeutically desirable.
The subclasses differ in the speed of binding and unbinding from the channel,
which determines whether they predominantly affect fast or all rates:
the one-c agents, with slow kinetics, depress conduction even at normal rates,
contributing to their proarrhythmia.
So use-dependence targets the drugs to fast and diseased tissue and distinguishes
the subclasses.
What are the roles of digoxin and magnesium as antiarrhythmics?
Digoxin acts as an antiarrhythmic chiefly by increasing vagal tone,
which slows conduction through the atrioventricular node and prolongs its
refractory period, so it controls the ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation and
flutter, particularly in the sedentary or in heart failure,
though it controls the resting rate better than the exertional rate.
Magnesium is the treatment of choice for torsades de pointes,
the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia associated with a prolonged QT,
suppressing the early afterdepolarisations that trigger it;
it is also used in digoxin toxicity and in some refractory arrhythmias,
and is given in the management of severe asthma and pre-eclampsia.
Both fall outside the Vaughan Williams classification.
So digoxin slows the atrioventricular node vagally for rate control in atrial
fibrillation, and magnesium is the specific treatment for torsades and a useful
adjunct in other arrhythmias.
What are the important cautions with adenosine?
Adenosine, given as a rapid intravenous bolus followed by a flush because of its
very short half-life of seconds, terminates supraventricular tachycardias involving
the atrioventricular node and is used diagnostically to reveal the underlying
atrial rhythm.
Its cautions are several: it commonly causes transient but distressing chest
tightness, flushing, dyspnoea and a sense of impending doom,
and a brief period of asystole, so the patient is warned and resuscitation
facilities are available.
It can provoke bronchospasm, so it is used cautiously or avoided in asthma.
Its effect is potentiated and prolonged by dipyridamole, which blocks its uptake,
so the dose is reduced, and antagonised by theophylline and caffeine.
The denervated transplanted heart is supersensitive.
It should not be used in pre-excited atrial fibrillation or broad-complex
tachycardia of uncertain origin. So adenosine's cautions are bronchospasm,
drug interactions, transplant supersensitivity and avoidance in pre-excitation.
How does the pre-excitation of Wolff-Parkinson-White affect the choice of drug?
In Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome an accessory pathway connects atria and
ventricles, bypassing the atrioventricular node.
This creates a specific danger in atrial fibrillation:
drugs that block the atrioventricular node — digoxin, verapamil, diltiazem,
adenosine and to some extent beta-blockers — may, by blocking the node,
allow rapid, unimpeded conduction down the accessory pathway to the ventricles,
accelerating the ventricular rate and risking degeneration into ventricular
fibrillation.
Therefore, in pre-excited atrial fibrillation these atrioventricular nodal blocking
drugs are contraindicated, and the treatment is electrical cardioversion if
unstable, or an agent that acts on the accessory pathway,
such as flecainide or procainamide, if stable,
with definitive treatment by catheter ablation of the pathway.
So in pre-excited atrial fibrillation the atrioventricular nodal blockers are
dangerous and avoided, in favour of cardioversion or pathway-acting drugs.
Distinguish the pharmacokinetics of lipophilic and hydrophilic beta-blockers.
The beta-blockers differ in lipid solubility, which affects their handling.
The lipophilic agents, such as propranolol and metoprolol, are well absorbed,
undergo extensive hepatic first-pass metabolism with variable bioavailability,
have shorter half-lives, and cross the blood-brain barrier,
so they may cause central effects such as vivid dreams and are subject to hepatic
interactions.
The hydrophilic agents, such as atenolol and sotalol, are less completely absorbed,
undergo little hepatic metabolism, are excreted largely unchanged by the kidney so
they accumulate in renal impairment,
have longer half-lives allowing once-daily dosing, and penetrate the brain less,
with fewer central effects.
So lipophilic beta-blockers are hepatically metabolised,
shorter-acting and centrally penetrant,
while hydrophilic agents are renally excreted,
longer-acting and less centrally active,
which guides the choice in hepatic or renal impairment and where central effects
matter.
Describe labetalol and carvedilol.
Labetalol and carvedilol are beta-blockers with additional alpha-one-blocking,
vasodilating activity, so they reduce blood pressure both by beta-blockade and by
arteriolar vasodilatation, lowering systemic vascular resistance without the reflex
tachycardia of a pure vasodilator.
Labetalol is used intravenously for the controlled treatment of severe
hypertension, including hypertensive emergencies and hypertension in pregnancy and
pre-eclampsia, and in aortic dissection, and orally for hypertension.
Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-blocker with alpha-blockade and antioxidant
properties used in chronic heart failure,
where it is one of the beta-blockers shown to improve survival, and in hypertension.
So labetalol and carvedilol combine beta- and alpha-blockade,
labetalol valuable for acute severe hypertension and in pregnancy,
carvedilol for chronic heart failure,
the added vasodilatation distinguishing them from the pure beta-blockers.
What is intrinsic sympathomimetic activity?
Intrinsic sympathomimetic activity is the property of certain beta-blockers — such
as pindolol and oxprenolol — of being partial agonists at the beta-adrenoceptor:
they block the receptor against the full effect of catecholamines but themselves
produce a weak stimulation.
The practical consequence is that they cause less resting bradycardia and less
reduction of resting cardiac output than the pure antagonists,
while still blunting the response to exercise and stress,
and they may cause less peripheral coldness.
However, they have not been shown to share the prognostic benefit of the pure
beta-blockers after myocardial infarction and in heart failure,
and are little used for those indications.
So intrinsic sympathomimetic activity is a partial-agonist property that lessens
resting bradycardia but lacks the prognostic benefit of conventional beta-blockade,
so these agents have a limited place.
How is beta-blocker overdose managed?
Beta-blocker overdose causes bradycardia, hypotension, atrioventricular block and,
in severe cases, cardiogenic shock,
and with the lipophilic agents central effects and seizures; some, such as sotalol,
also prolong the QT. Management is supportive and specific.
Supportive measures include securing the airway, intravenous fluids,
atropine for bradycardia, and cardiac pacing.
The specific antidote is glucagon, which increases myocardial cyclic AMP by a
receptor-independent route, bypassing the blockade to increase rate and
contractility, given as a bolus and infusion.
High-dose insulin with glucose — euglycaemic therapy — supports myocardial
energetics and is increasingly used,
and intravenous lipid emulsion may be used for the lipophilic agents in severe
toxicity.
So beta-blocker overdose is treated with supportive measures, atropine and pacing,
and specifically with glucagon and high-dose insulin-glucose,
bypassing or supporting the blocked myocardium.
What is ivabradine and how does it differ from a beta-blocker?
Ivabradine acts specifically on the funny current,
the pacemaker current of the sinoatrial node responsible for the slow phase-four
depolarisation, slowing the rate of depolarisation and so the heart rate,
without any other cardiac effect — no negative inotropy,
no effect on blood pressure or conduction below the node.
It therefore slows the sinus rate purely, in contrast to a beta-blocker,
which slows the rate, reduces contractility and conduction, and lowers pressure.
It is used to reduce the heart rate in angina and in chronic heart failure with a
fast sinus rhythm in patients who cannot take or are inadequately controlled by
beta-blockers, where rate reduction is beneficial.
It works only in sinus rhythm and can cause visual phosphenes.
So ivabradine selectively slows the sinus node through the funny current,
a pure rate-reducing agent complementary to, and differing from, the beta-blockers.
Outline the principles of rate versus rhythm control in atrial fibrillation.
In atrial fibrillation the two strategies are rate control — accepting the
fibrillation but controlling the ventricular rate — and rhythm control — restoring
and maintaining sinus rhythm.
Rate control is achieved with a beta-blocker or a rate-limiting calcium-channel
blocker, with digoxin as an adjunct, and is often the default, especially in older,
less symptomatic patients, large trials having shown broadly similar outcomes to
rhythm control.
Rhythm control — by electrical or pharmacological cardioversion with flecainide or
amiodarone, by antiarrhythmic maintenance,
or by catheter ablation — is preferred in younger or symptomatic patients,
in heart failure, and in newer evidence for early rhythm control.
Crucially, both strategies require assessment of stroke risk and anticoagulation
according to a risk score, independent of the rhythm strategy.
So the choice between rate and rhythm control is individualised,
but anticoagulation for stroke prevention is determined separately by risk.
Which drugs prolong the QT and risk torsades, and how is this managed?
Many drugs prolong the QT interval by blocking the cardiac potassium current,
predisposing to torsades de pointes,
including the class one-a and class three antiarrhythmics such as sotalol and
amiodarone, but also many non-cardiac drugs — certain antipsychotics,
some antidepressants, methadone, several antibiotics such as the macrolides and
quinolones, some antifungals and antiemetics.
The risk is increased by hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, bradycardia, female sex,
a congenital long-QT syndrome and the combination of QT-prolonging drugs.
Management is to identify and stop the offending drugs,
correct potassium and magnesium, avoid combinations, and monitor the QT;
established torsades is treated with magnesium, correction of electrolytes,
and increasing the heart rate by pacing or isoprenaline to shorten the QT.
So a wide range of cardiac and non-cardiac drugs prolong the QT,
the risk compounded by electrolyte disturbance, managed by avoidance,
correction and, for torsades, magnesium and rate increase.
When is electrical cardioversion preferred over drugs?
Electrical cardioversion — a synchronised direct-current shock — is preferred over
pharmacological treatment whenever a tachyarrhythmia causes haemodynamic
instability: hypotension, shock, ischaemia, or heart failure,
where it provides immediate restoration of rhythm without waiting for a drug to act
and without the drug's negative inotropy or proarrhythmia.
It is also used electively for the planned cardioversion of atrial fibrillation or
flutter, being more effective than drugs,
and in cardiac arrest with shockable rhythms as defibrillation.
The considerations are the need for sedation or anaesthesia in the conscious
patient, synchronisation to avoid inducing fibrillation, and,
for atrial fibrillation of more than forty-eight hours,
the need for anticoagulation or exclusion of atrial thrombus before cardioversion
to prevent embolic stroke.
So electrical cardioversion is preferred for the unstable patient and for effective
elective cardioversion, with attention to sedation,
synchronisation and anticoagulation.
Outline your stepwise management of a regular narrow-complex supraventricular
tachycardia.
In a stable patient with a regular narrow-complex tachycardia,
presumed to be a supraventricular tachycardia involving the atrioventricular node,
I would begin with vagal manoeuvres — the Valsalva manoeuvre,
particularly the modified Valsalva,
or carotid sinus massage in the absence of a bruit — which by increasing vagal tone
may terminate a nodal re-entrant tachycardia.
If unsuccessful, I would give adenosine as a rapid intravenous bolus,
which transiently blocks the node and terminates most such tachycardias,
warning the patient of its transient unpleasant effects; if it fails,
a longer-acting nodal blocker such as verapamil or a beta-blocker may be used.
If at any point the patient becomes haemodynamically unstable,
synchronised electrical cardioversion is indicated.
So the sequence is vagal manoeuvres, then adenosine,
then a longer-acting nodal blocker, with cardioversion for instability,
the rational stepwise approach to nodal supraventricular tachycardia.
How is ventricular tachycardia managed pharmacologically?
Sustained ventricular tachycardia in an unstable patient — with hypotension,
ischaemia or heart failure — is treated by immediate synchronised cardioversion,
and pulseless ventricular tachycardia by defibrillation as a shockable
cardiac-arrest rhythm.
In the stable patient, pharmacological treatment is used:
amiodarone is the usual first-line agent, given intravenously,
and lidocaine is an alternative, particularly in ischaemia.
Underlying causes are corrected — ischaemia, and electrolyte disturbances,
with magnesium and potassium given,
magnesium especially for polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and torsades.
The class one-c agents are avoided in the structural heart disease that usually
underlies ventricular tachycardia. Recurrent ventricular tachycardia may require an
implantable defibrillator and catheter ablation.
So ventricular tachycardia is cardioverted if unstable,
and treated with amiodarone or lidocaine if stable,
with correction of ischaemia and electrolytes and magnesium for the polymorphic
form.
What drugs are used for bradyarrhythmias?
Symptomatic bradycardia and atrioventricular block are treated,
while preparing for pacing if needed, with drugs that increase the heart rate.
Atropine, an antimuscarinic, is the first-line agent,
blocking vagal tone to increase the sinus rate and atrioventricular conduction,
given in repeated doses; it is less effective in block below the atrioventricular
node and ineffective in the denervated transplanted heart.
If atropine fails, an infusion of a beta-agonist such as isoprenaline or adrenaline
increases the rate, as a temporising measure,
and glucagon is used where the bradycardia is due to beta-blocker or
calcium-channel-blocker overdose.
Transcutaneous or transvenous pacing is the definitive temporary treatment pending
a permanent pacemaker where indicated.
So symptomatic bradycardia is treated with atropine first,
then an isoprenaline or adrenaline infusion,
with glucagon for overdose-induced bradycardia, as a bridge to pacing.
Compare amiodarone and dronedarone.
Dronedarone is a derivative of amiodarone developed to retain antiarrhythmic
efficacy while avoiding the iodine-related and other organ toxicities;
it lacks the iodine moiety and has a much shorter half-life,
so it does not cause the thyroid, pulmonary and corneal effects to the same degree
and does not accumulate as amiodarone does.
However, it is less effective than amiodarone at maintaining sinus rhythm,
and importantly it increased mortality in patients with severe or decompensated
heart failure and in permanent atrial fibrillation,
so it is contraindicated in those groups and is used only in selected patients with
paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation without significant heart failure.
It also has hepatic toxicity. So dronedarone trades some of amiodarone's efficacy
for reduced organ toxicity but is restricted by its heart-failure mortality signal,
making amiodarone still the more effective and broadly used, if more toxic, agent.
Pull together the antiarrhythmic and beta-blocker material into a final synthesis.
I would treat arrhythmias by the rhythm and the haemodynamic state,
cardioverting the unstable, and otherwise choosing the drug by its action on the
action potential, while respecting proarrhythmia.
For nodal supraventricular tachycardia, vagal manoeuvres then adenosine;
for atrial fibrillation, rate control with a beta-blocker,
rate-limiting calcium-channel blocker or digoxin,
or rhythm control with flecainide in the normal heart or amiodarone,
with anticoagulation decided separately by stroke risk;
for ventricular tachycardia, amiodarone or lidocaine and correction of ischaemia
and electrolytes; for torsades, magnesium.
I would avoid class one-c agents in structural heart disease,
monitor the QT and electrolytes with class three agents and avoid nodal blockers in
pre-excited atrial fibrillation.
I would use beta-blockers for their antiarrhythmic, anti-anginal,
antihypertensive and prognostic benefits,
choosing esmolol for acute control and continuing but not acutely starting them
perioperatively, and monitor amiodarone for its toxicities.
So treatment is rhythm-directed, mechanism-based and mindful of proarrhythmia and
toxicity.
How is atrial flutter managed, and how does it differ from atrial fibrillation?
Atrial flutter is a macro-re-entrant atrial tachycardia,
typically with a regular atrial rate around three hundred per minute conducted to
the ventricles in a fixed ratio, often two to one giving a ventricular rate near
one hundred and fifty.
It differs from atrial fibrillation, which is chaotic and irregular.
Its management parallels that of atrial fibrillation:
rate control with a beta-blocker or rate-limiting calcium-channel blocker,
though the rate can be harder to control; rhythm control by cardioversion,
to which flutter is very sensitive, often requiring a low-energy shock,
or by drugs; and the same assessment of stroke risk and anticoagulation,
since flutter carries a similar thromboembolic risk.
Importantly, typical atrial flutter is very amenable to cure by catheter ablation
of the cavotricuspid isthmus, which is often first-line for recurrent cases.
So flutter is managed like atrial fibrillation for rate,
rhythm and anticoagulation, but is especially responsive to low-energy
cardioversion and to curative ablation.
Summarise how anticoagulation decisions are made in atrial fibrillation.
Anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation is decided by the balance of stroke risk
against bleeding risk, independent of whether a rate- or rhythm-control strategy is
chosen.
The stroke risk is estimated with a risk score — the CHA2DS2-VASc score — which
counts factors such as heart failure, hypertension, age, diabetes, prior stroke,
vascular disease and sex; a score at or above the relevant threshold indicates
anticoagulation.
The bleeding risk is assessed and modifiable factors addressed,
but a high bleeding risk rarely outweighs a clear stroke indication.
Anticoagulation is now usually with a direct oral anticoagulant in preference to
warfarin for non-valvular atrial fibrillation,
being at least as effective with less intracranial bleeding and no monitoring,
with warfarin retained for valvular disease and some other situations.
So anticoagulation is guided by the CHA2DS2-VASc stroke risk,
tempered by bleeding risk, and delivered preferentially with a direct oral
anticoagulant, a decision made separately from the rhythm strategy.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The Vaughan Williams system classifies antiarrhythmics by action on the
action potential: I (sodium block, subdivided a/b/c), II (beta-blockers),
III (potassium block, prolong repolarisation), IV (calcium block at nodes);
adenosine, digoxin and magnesium fall outside it.
Second, Lidocaine (Ib) suppresses ventricular arrhythmias;
flecainide (Ic) treats atrial arrhythmias but is proarrhythmic and contraindicated
in structural heart disease/post-MI;
amiodarone is broad-spectrum (all four classes) but has serious chronic toxicity
(thyroid, lung, liver, cornea, skin).
Third, Class IV (verapamil, diltiazem) and adenosine act on the AV node for
supraventricular tachycardia/rate control;
adenosine gives transient AV block as a rapid bolus; magnesium treats torsades.
Fourth, Beta-blockers (class II) are classified by beta-1 selectivity,
intrinsic sympathomimetic activity and added alpha-blockade;
they are antiarrhythmic, antihypertensive,
anti-anginal and improve survival in heart failure/post-MI;
esmolol (esterase-metabolised, ultra-short) is ideal for acute perioperative
control.
Fifth, Beta-blocker harms: bradycardia/block, heart-failure precipitation,
bronchospasm (non-selective), masking hypoglycaemia,
and a rebound withdrawal syndrome; the POISE trial showed acute untitrated
perioperative initiation increases stroke/mortality — continue established
beta-blockade but don't start it acutely.
Thank you. That concludes the station.